Numbers 12:3:
“Moses was by far
the meekest of all the men.”
Now, when we analyze our own personality,
how many of us zero in on meekness?
That might not be the first quality
that comes to mind.
We may think that it’s rather benign,
innocent, maybe even inconsequential.
We think: ‘You know, I have other
‘bigger issues I need to deal with first.
‘I need to work on being more courageous,
impartial, loving, forgiving, discerning.’
And a whole list
of other qualities might come to mind.
Well, meekness might sound
benign and inconsequential.
In reality,
it is a very complex quality
and quite diverse.
Please find Exodus chapter 2.
Was Moses born meek,
sweet, and complete?
No, there’s no indication
that meekness is an innate quality.
Now, it’s true that at Exodus 2:2
it does say that when he was born,
Moses was beautiful.
But it does not say he was meek.
And if you think about it,
Moses was raised in the arrogant,
haughty family of Pharaoh
—the world-renowned leader at that time.
He was not taught to be meek
during his adolescent years.
So, what have we learned thus far?
It’s actually encouraging.
We do not have to be born with meek genes
or with a predisposition to meekness
in order to attain that quality.
And we don’t have to have
the perfect upbringing to cultivate meekness.
With time and patience,
all of us can attain that quality.
Now, Moses can be described
as “by far [by far]
the meekest of all the men.”
He was in a category all by himself.
Well, how did that happen?
Well, he was actually coached
and trained personally by Jehovah.
Jehovah obviously saw the potential in Moses
and some of those qualities
he might have developed
in his upbringing in Pharaoh’s house
—dignity, confidence
(sometimes overconfidence), poise.
But of all those acquired gifts,
Jehovah could not use him
to his maximum potential
until—until— he cultivated meekness.
And this was not a 40-day curriculum.
It was a 40-year lesson
of contemplation and cultivating humility.
He was just a shepherd
and not even of his own sheep.
It was his father-in-law’s sheep.
But with his changed situation
and having some time on his hands,
he was now able to contemplate
the type of man he was
and the type of God he served.
And he changed.
He developed this quality of meekness.
Now, the Insight  book
describes meekness this way,
and you’ll see it is a complex quality.
It says: “[It’s] a mildness of temper,
without haughtiness or vanity.
“The mental disposition that enables one
“to endure injury with patience
“and without irritation, resentment,
or vindictive retaliation.”
Now, that’s a tall order, isn’t it?
You know, one Watchtower
described meekness
as a ‘piece of artwork
painted by a skilled artist.’
Now, look at the artwork there;
it’s beautiful.
Moses, in the development of meekness,
was so beautiful to Jehovah
that He made sure
it was put under the spotlight
—“by far the meekest of all the men.”
But what’s the point of similarity
between a piece of artwork and meekness?
Well, the artist
has to blend colors
together deftly and skillfully,
and a variety of colors comes together.
For example,
of those three primary colors
on a color wheel,
it’s red, yellow, and blue.
Well, by mixing these colors together,
an artist can paint
a beautiful, tranquil painting.
And as you see in the image
of the secondary colors,
if you mix red and yellow together,
what color do you see between them?
It’s orange.
If you mix yellow and blue together,
what color do you see then?
You see green.
And if you mix red and blue together,
it produces violet or purple.
Well, the artist
further mixes colors together,
and he can get all the hues necessary
to paint a beautiful, tranquil scene.
Well, what’s the point of similarity?
Meekness is not one color.
It’s not just one quality.
It’s blending many
different qualities together
in a skilled fashion.
To achieve meekness,
it requires that we
mix together various virtues
like humility,
lowliness of mind, gentleness,
patience, mildness of temper, long-suffering.
And like an artist, if we work
on all those qualities simultaneously,
the result is this beautiful masterpiece
that we call meekness.
Please turn now to Numbers chapter 12.
We’re going to reason on verse 3
from a different aspect.
And so there it is again, verse 3:
“Now the man Moses was by far
the meekest of all the men
on the face of the earth.”
So leave your Bible open there for a moment.
Question: Who wrote those words?
Well, those were Moses’ own words.
And so some commentators
have criticized this,
saying that this was unjustified self-praise,
somewhat like a person who says of himself,
“I’m humble and I’m proud of it.”
Well, let’s look at the context first here.
The situation is described
at Numbers 12:1, 2.
Moses’ sister and brother
challenged his authority
as the official spokesman for Jehovah.
And Miriam was listed first in this mutiny.
She was the oldest of the three siblings.
Moses was the youngest.
And it’s apparent that Miriam
was the instigator,
because if you glance down there in verse 10,
of the two, she was the only one
struck with leprosy.
And remember meekness,
the definition, part of it, was:
“Endures injury
with patience without irritation,
resentment, or retaliation.”
So Moses absorbed
this withering,
blistering provocation meekly.
And now look at the end of verse 2;
it says: “Jehovah was listening.”
So Jehovah was right there.
He saw and heard the level of vehemence.
Well, what was Moses’ relationship
with Jehovah?
Verse 8 says:
“Face-to-face I speak to him,
openly, not by riddles;
and the appearance
of Jehovah is what he sees.”
Well, we understand, of course,
that this was through an angel.
But Moses had this two-way communication
directly with Jehovah.
In fact, Insight  had
a significant statement, I thought.
It said that “Moses . . . had a more direct,
“constant, [and] intimate
relationship with Jehovah
than did any [other] prophet
prior to Jesus Christ.”
Now, that’s quite a statement, isn’t it?
And think about it.
When Jesus came,
he superseded Moses’ status
because at that point,
Jesus became ‘by far the meekest man’
that ever walked the earth.
But what did Jesus say
about himself at Matthew 11:29?
He said: “I am mild-tempered
and lowly [of] heart.”
Meekness.
Well, was that unjustified
self-praise on his part?
No, it was unvarnished truth.
And it’s similar with Moses
and the way he described himself.
It’s true, he penned the words,
but we must never forget
those were not his words.
He was inspired by God.
He was the meekest of all men.
Well, was he perfect in this quality?
No.
We all recall the rash action on his part
when he struck the rock to bring forth water
and the credit for the miracle he took away
from Jehovah and applied to himself.
Well, that was a huge mistake
that Moses regretted
for the rest of his life.
And Jehovah took the insult seriously;
he did not allow him
to enter the Promised Land.
But how did Jehovah view Moses after that?
Find Deuteronomy 34:10.
Moses was still viewed by Jehovah
as the finest example of all men.
And Deuteronomy 34:10 says:
“But there has never again
arisen a prophet in Israel like Moses,
whom Jehovah knew face-to-face.”
It was a complimentary line about Moses.
Who wrote Deuteronomy?
Moses.
But in this case, these
were not his words penned down.
He had already died,
you see, in verse 5 there.
And so Insight  attributes
these final inspired words of the book
to Joshua, the writer
of the next book of the Bible.
So meekness, it’s a complex
and beautiful quality
that we can strive to more fully achieve.